===========================
Installing the product 
===========================

.. admonition:: Description

		Ensuring the product elements (types, browser layers,
		resources) are correctly installed. 

In this part, we will provide the code to be executed when the
integrator “adds”, i.e. installs, the InstantMessage product to the
Plone site. This aspect of the product code is called the “Extension
Profile” (or “Setup Profile”) and is managed under the hood by a
machinery called GenericSetup.

For more about GenericSetup, its possibilities, and how a developer uses
it, read the `GenericSetup tutorial`_.

The setup profile files (profiles/default)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The setup profile is composed of a set of GenericSetup XML files
containing setup declarations.

**Type declaration and definition**

First, we provide the files needed for adding the types to CMF’s types
registry (portal\_types): ``types.xml`` and
``types/InstantMessage.xml``.

In ``types.xml``, within the ``<object name="portal_types" ... />``
element, add the setup code for the type(s) you want to install:

::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <object name="portal_types" meta_type="Plone Types Tool">
     <property
        name="title">Controls the available content types in your portal</property>
     <object name="InstantMessage"
        meta_type="Factory-based Type Information with dynamic views"/>
    </object> 

The *name* property of the ``<object>`` node constitutes the called
*portal type* name of the content-type, a CMF concept which supports two
things:

#. Dynamic typing: objects can change their content type during their
   lifetime. To do this use ``_setPortalTypeName(<type>``\ ``)``.
#. You can have arbitrarily many different content types using the same
   base class (and having therefore the same ``meta_type``) but
   differing in their Factory Type Information (FTI) settings.

The *portal type* name was formerly set in a content-type class
attribute called *portal\_type*, which is no longer necessary.

The name of the file inside the ``profiles/default/types`` folder must
match the portal type name, with spaces converted to underscores
whenever necessary. So, in\ `` types/InstantMessage.xml``, add the code
for the InstantMessage FTI object:

::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <object name="InstantMessage"
       meta_type="Factory-based Type Information with dynamic views"
       i18n:domain="example.archetype" xmlns:i18n="http://xml.zope.org/namespaces/i18n">
      <property name="title" i18n:translate="">Example AT - InstantMessage</property>
      <property name="description"
        i18n:translate="">An example type (InstantMessage) discussed in the AT Developer Manual.</property>

In these first lines we give the content-type a title and a description.

The *title* property indicates the user-friendly name of the
content-type. This is what’s supposed to be used in the user interface,
and can be accessed using the ``<fti>.title_or_id()`` or the ``Type()``
methods, which both return the content-type title if it exists or the
content-type id otherwise. Like portal type, this property was formerly
set in a the content-type class attribute called ``archetype_name``,
which is no longer neccessary.

::

      <property name="content_meta_type">InstantMessage</property>
      <property name="content_icon">document_icon.gif</property>
      <property name="product">example.archetype</property>
      <property name="factory">addInstantMessage</property>

.. _GenericSetup tutorial: ../../../../tutorial/genericsetup

The ``meta_type`` property of the object is a Zope concept to organize
object classification or containment. For historical reasons, it is used
in CMF in some places because first versions of CMF didn’t have today’s
``portal_type``. Also note that Archetypes uses the content-type class
name as the meta\_type value, unless given explicitly.

The ``content_icon`` property specifies the icon image file which will
be shown in the Plone UI for this content-type. This icon image file
must be accessible from the context of the content-type, and therefore
should be placed into a CMF skin layer (the CMF way) or in a browser
resource directory (the Zope 3 way).

The ``factory`` property indicates the factory function which will be
used to create and initialize new content objects of this type. This
factory is automatically generated by the Archetypes framework, when the
product is initialized (via the code in the startup module), and is
always named ``add<content-meta-type>``. The factory is also associated
with a certain product by means of the ``product`` property.

::

      <property name="immediate_view">atct_edit</property>
      <property name="global_allow">True</property>
      <property name="filter_content_types">False</property>
      <property name="allow_discussion">False</property>

The ``global_allow`` property determines if the content-type will be
available to be added from anywhere in the site.

The ``filter_content_types`` property, paired with
allowed\_content\_types, controls what content-types will be addable
inside the current one.

With ``allow_discussion``, we specify whether or not comments will be
allowed by default on this content-type.

::

      <property name="default_view">@@instantmessage_view</property>
      <property name="view_methods">
        <element value="@@instantmessage_view" />
      </property>
      <alias from="(Default)" to="@@instantmessage_view" />
      <alias from="edit" to="atct_edit" />
      <alias from="sharing" to="@@sharing" />
      <alias from="view" to="@@instantmessage_view" />

Here we define CMF views (templates) and aliases that map content-type
methods to views.

::

      <action title="View" action_id="view" category="object" condition_expr=""
        url_expr="string:${object_url}/" visible="True">
        <permission value="View" />
      </action>
      <action title="Edit" action_id="edit" category="object" condition_expr=""
        url_expr="string:${object_url}/edit" visible="True">
        <permission value="Modify portal content" />
      </action>
    </object>

The ``<action>`` elements register type-specific actions for the
content-type. The ``object`` category makes the render as tabs in the
Plone UI.

-  The ``url_expr`` is a `TALES expression`_ that defines the URL from
   where the action will be triggered and should match one of the method
   aliases defined above. Hence, the ``edit`` action points to
   ``string:${object_url}/edit``, which means that if you are at
   ``/path/to/object`` and click ``edit``, you will go to
   ``/path/to/object/edit``. ``/edit`` then gets recognized as a method
   alias, which points to the page template ``atct_edit``, causing Zope
   to render ``/path/to/object/atct_edit``.
-  The <permission /> element specifies a guard permission for this
   action. If the user’s role doesn’t have this permission, the action
   won’t be available and the corresponding action tab won’t be shown.
-  In addition to the former criteria, the ``condition_expr`` is a TALES
   expression which will be evaluated to decide if the action is
   available or not.
-  The ``visible`` attribute indicates wheter the action tab will be
   visible or hidden. If it’s set to False, the tab won’t appear even
   when the action is available, but the exposed page will still be
   accesible from the associated URL.

\ **Notes:**\ 

-  Defining new content-type actions this way, i.e. using GenericSetup,
   supersedes the old ``updateActions`` function from
   ``ATContentTypes.content.base``.
-  Don’t worry. You don’t have to type all this XML each time you create
   a new content-type; since most of it is boilerplate (XML is very
   verbose) you can copy & paste an already working example (like `the
   CMFPlone ones`_) and modify only the changing bits.

.. _TALES expression: ../../../../tutorial/zpt/advanced-usage
.. _the CMFPlone ones: http://dev.plone.org/plone/browser/CMFPlone/tags/3.1.4/profiles/default/types

**Roles - Permissions mapping**

For our content type(s) to be usable, we need to assign the required
“Add” permission to the Plone site’s default roles: Contributor, Owner,
and Manager. This is done using the ``rolemap.xml`` file as follows:

::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <rolemap>
        <permissions>
            <permission name="example.archetype: Add InstantMessage" acquire="True">
              <role name="Manager"/>
              <role name="Owner"/>
              <role name="Contributor"/>
            </permission>
        </permissions>
    </rolemap>

**Browser skin layer**

In order to install our browser skin layer, we also add a
``browserlayer.xml`` file with the following code:

::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <layers>  
      <layer name="example.archetype"
             interface="example.archetype.interfaces.IInstantMessageSpecific" />
    </layers>

Registering our setup profile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This last step ensures everything can work. We update the package’s
``configure.zcml`` file with the code snippet that will load the
extension profile:

::

    <configure
        xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"
        xmlns:five="http://namespaces.zope.org/five"
        xmlns:genericsetup="http://namespaces.zope.org/genericsetup"
        i18n_domain="example.archetype" >

       <five:registerPackage package="." initialize=".initialize" />

       <include package=".browser" />

       <genericsetup:registerProfile
          name="default"
          title="Example Archetype content - InstantMessage"
          directory="profiles/default"
          description="Extension profile for Example AT - InstantMessage"
          provides="Products.GenericSetup.interfaces.EXTENSION"
          />

    </configure>

Restarting Zope
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that you have a first version of your product ready to be tested,
and installed via your buildout, you need to (re)start Zope.

Quick-installing the product
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Back in the Plone configuration (or Plone control panel), when you visit
the “Add/Remove Products” interface or the *portal\_quickinstaller* tool
through the ZMI (at the root of the site), you can see the product show
up under the category of “installable products”.

Select and click the button to install the product. If everything goes
fine, the product should be installed, and you’re ready to start using
it!
