Visual Design of Plone Web Sites
=====================================

Plone allows web site administrators and designers the ability to create
unique site designs. Here's an overview of the Plone layout, and some
design examples.

What does a Plone web site look like? For years there has been a
consistent design for the default Plone appearance. The default design
looks generally like this:

|plone-default-design-areas.png|

The Plone web site you use could have a design radically different from
this, but you should be able to find common elements, such as the log in
link and a navigation panel or menu. In the default design, the
navigation menu is in the left area, and usually appears as an indented
list of folders in the site. There also may be a set of tabs in the *Log
In, Location Information* strip near the top.

We can distinguish between the *design* of a web site and the
*functionality* of a web site. Quite often, these aspects of a website are also under the control of different people with different skills. A designer will think about the layout, the appearance and the user interface, while a content editor will think about the structure of the information.

All of these aspects can be strictly separated in Plone, and can be adjusted independent from each other.


We'll use the default Plone layout design as an example of typical
divisions of the screen:

.. figure:: /_static/plonedefaultareaslabeled.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

You may need to adapt these terms as needed for your Plone web site
design. You may encounter varied terms for describing screen real
estate, such as right and left "slots," for the left and right column
areas, "portlet," or "viewlet," for discrete areas or boxes, and several
other terms.

For example, we can select three web sites from the `list of Plone web
sites <http://plone.org/support/sites>`_ to compare:

.. figure:: /_static/akamaidesign.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

This is the web site for Akamai, a leading provider of online web tools
and acceleration technology. The header area has simple text menu
choices for five main content areas arrayed horizontally at the bottom
of the header area. At right, the header contains another horizontal
menu and a search box. The bottom of the header area would contain log
in information, for use by the maintainers of the web site. The main
graphic at top left is a focus area for eye-catching graphics and
current topics. There is a main area at left center where the main text
is located. The right column holds a series of "portlets." The footer
contains a horizontal menu, repeating the menu choices in the header,
for convenience. There is a right-most column that has zoom settings.

.. figure:: /_static/discoverdesign.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

This is the web site for Discover Magazine. The header area contains a
large horizontal menu, the "main menu," if you will, a smaller
horizontal menu at upper right, and a search box. This site is rich with
textual "portlets" that cover so many topic areas, which are divided
into three columnar areas, left, middle, and right. The top of the
middle column contains a focus area with a video. There are large
interactive boxes in several places. The footer contains basic site
identification information and a link to "about us." For a large web
site like Discover's, maintainers of the site log in to custom editing
screens, and there is much automation of data feeds -- Plone uses Zope,
a sophisticated storage system, and Python, a great programming
language, which facilitates intelligent "wiring" of the flow of text and
graphics into the web site.

.. figure:: /_static/smealdesign.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The last of the three sites to examine is the web site for Penn State
University's Smeal College of Business. The header contains a logo, a
horizontal menu for main topic areas, and a search box at right. There
is a main menu for this site at left, which is more traditional for a
Plone web site. A large graphical area contains a rolling focus
animation. There is another small graphical focus in the left column.
Three textual columns round out the design, above the basic
identification footer. Maintainers of this web site enter by means of a
custom log in page, with the log in and user information showing along
the bottom of the topmost header area.

So, what does a Plone web site look like? Traditionally, the
out-of-the-box look is like that shown at the top of this page, with
header, menu, columns, and a footer. These three sites illustrate how
designers typically combine focus areas, vertical and horizontal menus,
"portlets," and textual content, usually arrayed in several columns. The
underlying machinery is Plone and Zope and Python, but the design
"theme" or "skin" can be made to look any way the designer chooses.

.. |plone-default-design-areas.png| image:: /_static/plone-default-design-areas.png
