Your Dashboard
===================

A Plone user has a personal "dashboard" for customizing the personal
user interface.

Plone has several built-in "views" of news, events, recently changed
items, and such. These list views are held in discrete rectangular areas
called portlets. Think of a portlet as a window view of a given type of
content. For example, the news portlet offers a view of recently
published news items.

You control which portlets you view in your dashboard, and where they
are placed. The following screen capture shows what user Elizabeth Smith
would see after logging in and clicking her own name at upper right to
go to her personal area:

.. figure:: /_static/dashboard.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The dashboard appears to be empty for a new user.

Clicking the edit tab for the dashboard will show that there are
portlets already assigned to the dashboard -- the dashboard view shown
above is empty, because there is no content available for display in the
portlets on this new web site. Here are the default portlets:

.. figure:: /_static/dashboardedit.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

You see the *News* and *Events* portlets in the left-most column, the
*Recent Items* portlet in the second column, and the *Review List*
portlet in the right column. The third column does not have a portlet
assigned.

A new user account on a basic Plone web site will have a dashboard like
the one shown, but for a web site that has been customized with add-on
functionality, there may be more portlets to choose from, and the
dashboard might start out with several more placed in the columns. For
example, there could be portlets for "current weather," "stock ticker,"
"quote of the day," etc., depending on what is installed for the web
site (such things would require custom software). Depending on what is
installed for the site, the user can customize the portlets they want to
see and where to place them within the four columns.

So, for the typical Plone user account, the dashboard would start with
the portlets shown above, and later would be "populated" as news items,
events, and other content items are added to the web site.

