Advanced Control
=====================

The publication control system, under the advanced menu, has
sophisticated features for setting availability by date and by context.

The *state* menu has an *advanced*... item:

.. figure:: /_static/statemenu.png
   :align: center
   :alt: state-menu.png



which brings up the *advanced* state panel:

.. figure:: /_static/stateadvanced.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

Below an explanation section at the beginning of the panel, there is a
check box showing the content that will be affected by this change of
publication state. It shows that the folder "Long-tailed Skipper" will
be affected by this state change.

The next field, *Include contained items*, is a check box for
controlling whether the state change affects this item only (the
"Long-tailed Skipper" folder) or the items it contains and all of any
subfolders and other contained items. This is an important check box. It
lets you easily change the availability of an entire section of a
website. For example, the "Long-tailed Skipper" folder could contain
four subfolders, for photographs, species occurrence descriptions,
taxonomic history, and behavior descriptions, all of which has been kept
*private* during the initial work to build up this content. All of it
could be immediately made public -- it could be *published* -- by
checking this box and checking *Publish* at the bottom before saving.
Likewise, the *Submit for publication* choice would be used on a web
site where editors controlled ultimate publication.

Likewise, an entire section could be immediately made *private*. For
example, if an automobile rental agency decided to remove a car model
from its fleet, an entire section of their website devoted to this car
model, with several subfolders full of pages, images, and files, could
be set to *private*.

The next two date fields are for *effective date* and *expiration date*.
Their meanings are straightforward. If there is a window of time, for
which a content item or a set of content items is valid for publication,
it may be set with these fields.

A comment lets you attach an explanation to all content affected by the
state change. This is especially useful when several people are working
on a website, and a person less familiar with an area of the web site
looks at content and wonders why it isn't published. They wonder, "This
information looks good. Why isn't it published already?" Then they read
a comment that says something like, "Don't publish until Richard checks
on copyright issues regarding the items described here." Using comments
is a good idea for sensitive information, even if you are the only
person working on the web site, because you might forget why you made a
decision about publication state.

Finally, at the bottom there is a choice of several available states for
this action. It will vary, depending on the present state of the item.
For example, if the item is currently in a published state, there won't
be a choice for *publish*, if the item is presently in a *private*
state, there won't be a choice for *make private*, etc. If an item is
published already, there will be choices in this bottom part of the
panel for *reject* and *retract*, for "unpublishing" at item, setting it
back to *public draft* or then to *private* state.


