Basic Publication States
=============================

The publication control system for Plone is very flexible, starting with
basic settings for making an item private or public.

In the upper right corner of the edit panel for any content type --
folders, images, pages, etc., and any specialized content types -- there
is a menu on the right for publication state. This *state* menu has
settings for controlling publication state:

.. figure:: /_static/statemenu1.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The header for the menu will show the current publication state for the
content item, such as *State: Private*, as shown above. Private is the
initial state when you create a content item -- an uploaded image, a
page, a news item -- and in the private state, as the name indicates,
the content item will generally not be available to visitors to the web
site. The *Publish* menu choice will make the content item available on
the web site to anonymous visitors. The *Submit for publication* menu
choice is used on web sites where there are content editors who must
approve items for publication, as discussed below.

Also, and this will be very important, certain content types, such as
news items and events, will not appear on the website as you expect,
until they are explicitly *published*.

Store this in your memory: **Publication state is important!**

Publication state can be changed only by users whose accounts have the
necessary permissions. The menu choices in the state menu will reflect
existing permissions settings. For example, in a big newspaper web site,
a reporter could add pages for news articles, but the state menu will
not show a *Publish* menu choice, only a *Submit for publication* menu
choice. This is because a reporter must submit articles up the line to
the editorial staff for approval before publication. If your account has
the permissions, however, the *Publish* menu choice will appear and you
can simply publish in one step.

For an editor, a content item that has been submitted may be *published*
or *rejected*, either outright, because it is an inappropriate
submission for the situation, or for the more typical reason that the
content item needs revision.

After a content item has been *published*, it may be *retracted*, to
change the state back to *public draft* state, or *sent back* to
private, if desired. The menu choices in the state menu will change
accordingly:

.. figure:: /_static/statemenu2.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

Consideration should be given to retracting ("unpublishing"), or setting
to *private*, any content that has become obsolete or undesired for some
reason. Setting to *private* will take the item from public view and
from showing up in search results, but will keep it around in case the
format or the actual material (text, images, etc.) is needed later. This
is especially true for content relating to events that may recur or to
one-of-a-kind creations. The decision to delete or to set to *private*
may depend on whether or not the content exists elsewhere, on a local
computer. If the content is large in size, in the sense of disk space
taken, perhaps saving to a local computer is warranted before deletion,
if space on the website server computer is an issue.

