Cutting, Copying and Pasting Items
=======================================

Cut, copy, and paste operations involve moving one or more items from
one folder to another.

Cut/Paste
---------

Moving items from one area to another on a website is a common task.
Often this need arises with placement of content in the wrong folder.
For example, if the author of the following content about Skipper
butterflies realizes that a Swallowtail butterfly was mistakenly
included -- the Eastern Tiger Swallowtail folder shown below -- the
folder can simply be moved with a *cut*/*paste* operation:

.. figure:: /_static/copy_of_operationcut.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

Note that the Eastern Tiger Swallowtail folder has been checked, and
that the *cut* button is about to be clicked. After clicking the *cut*
button, the screen will show a new *paste* button. The Eastern Tiger
Swallowtail folder and all of its contents are now in the web site's
"memory." The Eastern Tiger Swallowtail folder does not immediately
disappear, however, awaiting the actual *paste* operation. The *paste*
button is now highlighted to show the cut/paste operation is in
progress:

.. figure:: /_static/operationpaste.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The *paste* button is now active. The next step is to navigate to the
destination folder, in this case the Swallowtails folder:

.. figure:: /_static/copy_of_operationpaste2.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

After clicking the Swallowtails folder, the *paste* button will continue
to show, because the paste operation has not yet been completed:

.. figure:: /_static/operationpaste3.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

And last, clicking the *paste* button for the destination folder adds
the Eastern Tiger Swallowtail folder to its proper place in the
Swallowtails folder, and cuts it from the original location, the
Skippers folder, and the *cut*/*paste* operation is complete:

.. figure:: /_static/operationpaste4.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The *paste* button remains active, because you would be allowed to
continue pasting the folder in other places if you wanted. This could
happen in several situations, including when you need to copy one page,
for example, as a kind of template or basis document, into several
folders.

Copy/Paste
----------

A *copy*/*paste* operation is identical to the *cut*/*paste* operation,
except that there is no removal of content from the original folder. It
works as you would expect it to work.


