=============
Sending email
=============

.. admonition:: Description

        How to programmatically send email in Plone


Introduction
============

This document tells how to send email from Plone.

Email can be sent:

* manually, by calling *MailHost*;
* using a *Content Rule* (content rules have an email-out action by default)
  which can be activated by a workflow transition, for example;
* triggering email-based password reset.


Configuring MailHost for a mail queue
=====================================

Products.MailHost supports asynchronous sending in a separate thread via a mail
queue.

.. note::
  Using a mail queue is recommended for production sites.

To enable the queue, go to the Management Interface and the MailHost tool. Here, check the "Use
mail queue" setting and set the "Queue directory". The queue directory is given
as an absolute path on your server, must have a maildir layout (it needs the
directories 'cur', new' and 'tmp' in it) and must be writeable by the system
user, under which the Zope thread runs.


Manually calling MailHost
=========================

After your ``mail_text`` is prepared, sending it is as simple as::

    from plone import api

    try:
        mail_host = api.portal.get_tool(name='MailHost')
        # The ``immediate`` parameter causes an email to be sent immediately
        # (if any error is raised) rather than sent at the transaction
        # boundary or queued for later delivery.
        return mail_host.send(mail_text, immediate=True)
    except SMTPRecipientsRefused:
        # Don't disclose email address on failure
        raise SMTPRecipientsRefused('Recipient address rejected by server')


Preparing mail text
-------------------

``mail_text`` can be generated by calling a page template (``.pt``) with
keyword arguments. The values are accessed in the template as
``option/keyword``. For example, take a sample template:

.. code-block:: html

    <tal:root define="lt string:&lt;;
                      gt string:&gt;;
                      dummy python:request.RESPONSE.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain;; charset=%s' % options['charset']);
                      member python:options['member'];"
    >From: "<span tal:replace="python:here.email_from_name" />" <span tal:replace="structure lt"/><span tal:replace="python:here.email_from_address" /><span tal:replace="structure gt"/>
    To: <span tal:replace="python:member.getProperty('email')" />
    Subject: <span i18n:domain="yourproduct" i18n:translate="yoursubjectline" tal:omit-tag="">Subject Line</span>
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=<span tal:replace="python:options['charset']" />
    Dear <span tal:replace="member/getFullname" />:
    You can now log in as <span tal:replace="member/getId" /> at <span tal:replace="python:options['portal_url']" />
    Cheers!
    The website team
    </tal:root>

This can be called with a ``member`` object and the ``portal_url``::

    mail_template = portal.mail_template_id
    mail_text = mail_template(member=member,
                              portal_url=portal.absolute_url(),
                              charset=email_charset,
                              request=REQUEST)

For more complete examples (with i18n support, etc.) see the password reset
modules (particularly ``Products.remember.tools.registration``).

.. note::

    If you don't need to have third parties to override your email templates
    it might be cleaned to use Python string templates, as XML based TAL
    templates are not designed for plain text templating.

Graceful failing
----------------

In the case SMTP server rejects the connection. etc. don't abort the current transaction (which is
the default behavior)

* http://stackoverflow.com/questions/9013009/ploneformgen-and-fail-safe-email-send
