Adding Pages
=================

Pages in Plone vary greatly, but are single "web pages," of one sort or
another.

To add a page, use the *Add new...* menu for a folder:

.. figure:: /_static/copy_of_addnewmenu.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

Select **Page** from the drop-down menu, and you'll see the *Add Page*
panel:

.. figure:: /_static/editpagepanelplone3.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

The **Title** and **Description** fields are there at the top. Fill each
of them out appropriately. There is a *Change note* field at the bottom,
also a standard input that is very useful for storing helpful memos
describing changes to a document as you make them. This is useful for
pages on which you may be collaborating with others.

The middle panel, **Body Text**, is where the action is for pages. The
software used for making Pages in Plone, generically called *visual
editor* and specifically a tool called TinyMCE, is a most important
feature allowing you to do WYSIWYG editing. WYSIWYG editing -- *What You
See Is What You Get* -- describes how word processing software works.
When you make a change, such as setting a word to bold, you see the bold
text immediately.

People are naturally comfortable with the WYSIWYG approach of typical
word processors. We will describe later in this manual.

Markup languages
----------------

Your site-administrator may also enable so-called markup languages.
If you are the sort of person who likes to enter text using so-called
mark-up formats, you may switch off the visual editor under your
personal preferences. The mark-up formats available in Plone are:

-   [Markdown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown)
-   [Textile](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Textile_%28markup_language%29)
-   [Restructured Text](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText)

Each of these works by the embedding of special formatting codes within
text. For example, with structured text formatting, surrounding a word
or phrase by double asterisks will make that word or phrase bold, as in
\*\*This text would be bold.\*\* These mark-up formats are worth
learning for speed of input if you do a lot of page creation, or if you
are adept at such slightly more technical approaches to entering text.
Some people prefer such formats not just for speed itself, but for
fluidity of expression.
