Adjusting the Display Settings
===================================

Learn how display settings can change the look of your Collection page

While the main power of Collections lies in Criteria, the display
settings can make a big difference in the way your Collection will
appear. All three of the settings we will cover in this section can be
found by clicking the **Edit tab** of a Collection.

**Inherit Criteria**

By selecting the **Inherit Criteria** option, the Collection will
inherit the Criteria from a parent Collection. This is only useful when
using Sub Collections. If this is checked, you can create another
Collection that is more specific than the Parent while still retaining
the basic criteria of the Parent. A simple example might be a Parent
Collection for displaying all Events in a site, and a Sub Collection
that also displays Events (by inheriting Criteria) *but only* those
Events with a particular keyword.

**Limit Search Results**

We can use Limit Search Results to limit the number of results that
are Collection will display *per page*. This way if we have a Collection
that is displaying News Items, we can limit the results to five or ten,
instead of having it show all News Items on a single, large list.

**Display as a Table**

Display as a Table is simply another way to display the results of a
Collection. Instead of having the Collection spit out the results in a
list form, we can have it **generate a table** with the results, and set
exactly what information about the results we want displayed. We
customize the table by selecting the **Table Columns** from the left and
clicking the right arrow button to move it over to the right. In the
example above we chose to include the Title of the object, its Creator,
and the Effective date. You can use any number of the columns, or all of
them if you so choose.

When considering what to select, keep in mind that not all objects will
have the information for every column available. For example, the
**Start Date** and **End Date** only apply to Events. Therefore if you
added these columns and your table included Pages as well as Events then
the rows for the Pages would not have the Start and End Dates filled in.
The other thing to consider is that the more columns you have showing
the more crowded the table will become. The best rule of thumb is to
only display what you absolutely need to display.

A few more notes on selecting columns: You can select more than one at a
time by holding down the control key (Ctrl) while you click. If you want
to remove a column, select it on the right and click on the left arrow
button. Also you can add and remove columns by double clicking on their
name.

