===================
Adding validation
===================


.. admonition:: Description

  Server-side form validation is vital to ensure data sanity and
  protect our site from malicious users.


Field validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you've understood the "hello form", let's move onto a more
advanced topic: validation.

The easiest way to manage validation in a formlib-based form is to
specify the validation rules in our schema. Actually, you've
already implemented some validation: the customer, subject and
message fields are required. If you leave the *subject* field
empty, for example, and click the *send* button, a pretty red error
message will show up asking you to fill that field.

Let's add email validation to the *customer* field using the
constraint keyword argument fot that attribute in our schema. For
simplicity, the mail address checker that comes with the CMFDefault
utilities toolbox will be used in this example, althought you could
also use your own regular expression checking. The constraint
argument must be a callable that returns ``True`` if the value
submitted is valid, or raise an exception inheriting from
``zope.schema.ValidationError``, whose docstring will be used in
the error message.

::

    from zope.schema import ValidationError

    class InvalidEmailAddress(ValidationError):
        "Invalid email address"

    from Products.CMFDefault.utils import checkEmailAddress
    from Products.CMFDefault.exceptions import EmailAddressInvalid

    def validateaddress(value):
        try:
            checkEmailAddress(value)
        except EmailAddressInvalid:
            raise InvalidEmailAddress(value)
        return True

    class IFeedbackForm(Interface):
        """
        A typical feedback schema
        """
        customer = TextLine(title=u'Customer',
                          description=u'Customer email',
                          required=True,
                          constraint=validateaddress)

        subject = TextLine(title=u'Subject',
                           required=True)

        message = Text(title=u'Message',
                       description=u'The message body',
                       required=True)

Now, if you type an invalid address into the *customer* field and
click *send*, a kind and colorful error message will be displayed:

.. image:: validation_error_pretty.png

That was too easy, wasn't it?

Invariants validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*zope.formlib* also supports the validation of schema invariants,
e.g. the min value entered must be smaller than the max value. In
this example the form will be extended to provide a set of
predefined subjects and a field named *other* which must be filled
when selecting the the *Other* option in the subject select
dropdown. It's easier to explain it in Python than in English:

::

    from zope.schema import Choice
    from zope.interface import invariant, Invalid

    class IFeedbackForm(Interface):
        """
        A typical feedback schema
        """
        customer = TextLine(title=u'Customer',
                          description=u'Customer email',
                          required=True,
                          constraint=validateaddress)

        subject = Choice(title=u'Subject',
                       vocabulary='Available Subjects',
                       required=True,
                       )

        other = TextLine(title=u'Other',
                         description=u"""
                            If you've specified Other above,
                            please fill this this field too.""",
                            required=False)

        message = Text(title=u'Message',
                       description=u'The message body',
                       required=True)

        @invariant
        def otherFilledIfSelected(feedback):
            if feedback.subject == u'Other' and not feedback.other:
                raise Invalid("Please specify the motivation of your request")

Here, the *subject* field type has been set to *Choice*, and the
list of available values has been indicated to be obtained from the
*Available Subjects* vocabulary, a named utility which will be
defined shortly.

The form will call all the *invariant*-decorated functions of the
schema upon validation and catch any raised *Invalid* exceptions.

You still need to define the *Available Subjects* vocabulary:

::

    from zope.schema.vocabulary import SimpleVocabulary

    def availableSubjects(context):
        subjects = ('Comment',
                    'Feature Request',
                    'Technical Issue',
                    'Complaint',
                    'Other',
                    )
        return SimpleVocabulary.fromValues(subjects)

and register it as a named utility using ZCML in the
``configure.zcml`` file:

::

    <configure ... >
    ...
        <utility
                component=".browser.availableSubjects"
                name="Available Subjects"
                provides="zope.schema.interfaces.IVocabularyFactory"
                />
    </configure>

Restart your Zope instance for the changes to take effect and test
your new form. You'll see something similar to this:

.. image:: invariant_error.png

Unfortunately, invariant errors descriptions are not shown in the
default template.


